---
template: SinglePost
slug: The-moon-and-irrelevance
title: 'The moon and irrelevance: the difference between “so what?” and “A-ha!”'
status: Published
date: '2018-11-08'
featuredImage: /images/uploads/hcl-blog-moon.jpg
author: Professor Martin Connor PhD
excerpt: >-
  How authentic conversations with the right data can improve interest and
  collaboration.
categories:
  - category: Articles
---
Why are traditional performance reports monthly? Is it simply because that’s what businesses tend to do and public healthcare adopted the same approach in the mid 1980s?  Those with long memories will remember talk of the 'new public management' movement during the Reagan and Thatcher years where political optimists believed ‘business efficiency’ was necessary to manage public services effectively.

The root of the word monthly comes from the waxing and waning of the moon. This is linked in Western civilisation with the Roman Empire and church-based evolution of the modern calendar.  So, the reporting systems of modern, high-tech hospitals are driven by two epic arbitrarinesses: our nearest neighbour in the solar system and our modern version of the counting systems the ancient Egyptians used to predict the flooding of the Nile.  Not just tangential but wholly irrelevant to the delivery of care, in other words.

However, because monthly data is the currency of financial reimbursement and ‘performance management’ then this irrelevance has  to be suppressed.  Bureaucracies can’t tolerate ignorance, so they fill in the gaps in their understanding (often with myths). In the case of hospital performance data, we have created an industry to generate possible explanations of how monthly data tells us something, when in fact it tells us very little of direct relevance to individual clinical leaders and their teams.

This problem of basic relevance is why our clinical leaders and teams - when presented with monthly performance data - correctly say “so what?” as we often can’t explain what it has to do with them or what they could do to change how it looks. If it was only wasteful, that would be bad, but it is worse - it drives a culture of negative judgment that sanctions the view that organisations or teams are lazy, or incompetent, or (at worst) wilfully disregarding the public interest. 

From a technical point of view, the problem with monthly data is that it combines two forms of aggregation – time and scope.  Aggregations of time occur when many data moments (say, days) are bundled together into one.  Aggregations of scope occur when many types of things (say, doctors or teams) are bundled together into one.

So, monthly hospital- or specialty- level outpatient or surgery waiting lists don’t exist. They are fictions created to give the illusion of control by producing misleading aggregations of the real clinical situation – a set of individual patients awaiting an appointment or treatment by an individual doctor or team.

You can’t tackle a waiting list without authentic conversations with each team or doctor that has a capacity and demand imbalance or problems treating patients in time.  And the same goes for Emergency Department teams, outpatient clinics, theatres, wards and discharge services.

These conversations need automated, patient-level, high frequency, team-centred data because when _this _type of data is presented, the response is never “so what?” it’s “A-ha!”.

Does an information system like this exist? Yes - we call it SystemView, visit [healthcarelogic.com](https://www.healthcarelogic.com) for information on a new approach to data currently deployed in over 50 hospitals, empowering teams and offering constant A-ha moments to support the improvement of hospital performance.
